# Uncertainty during migration: selecting predictable resources in unpredictable conditions


-   Authors:
    - Emilie Dedeban
    - Quinn M.R. Webber
    - Michel Laforge
    - [Alec L. Robitaille](http://robitalec.ca)
    - [Eric Vander Wal](http://weel.gitlab.io)


##  Abstract

Environmental and climatic variation drive animal migration. Animals must adjust their
behavioural strategies, e.g., habitat selection, to match best the variation in resources;
resources whose value likely varies with conditions, such as weather. For example, climate
change makes processes, such as snowmelt and the emergence of vegetation less predictable
at the scale of months or weeks. Whereas climate change makes meteorological conditions
unpredictable – or dynamic – at the scale of days and hours. The profitability of selecting any
particular resource may vary by the local meteorological condition. We studied the impact of
dynamic weather conditions on fine scale movements strategies and resource selection during
spring migration of adult female woodland caribou (Rangifer tarandus). We assessed the role
played by static resources such as open, lichen, and closed forest and their role in a context-
dependent of dynamic weather conditions, including temperature, precipitation, and changing
snow, i.e., snow water equivalent. We tested the role of static resources and dynamic
conditions in three contexts: (1) whether caribou were encamped or moving behavioural using
hidden Markov models; state-specific habitat selection for, and the interaction between,
resources and conditions while (2) encamped and (3) moving. Weather conditions influenced
the probability of moving or staying encamped, and the probability of selecting for a resource,
which likely reflects the profitability of a given resource in a particular condition. The
probability of staying encamped in the forest increases as the temperature increases. But also,
the probability of selecting an open area is higher when precipitation is lower. We highlight
how meteorological conditions modify the selection of a resource and likely the profitability
of a given resource. The resource utility to a consumer is increasingly susceptible to climate-
change induced effects.